# loop-ensemble
We would like to share the results of our master thesis, the loop-Ensemble. We used Pure data Extended to develop three interconnectable musical instruments that are able to self-describe their technical principles via interaction. They are supposed to be used by students in higher secondary levels, but can also be enjoyed by anyone else. The three instruments ADD, DRUMBO and JERRY can loosely be assigned to musical roles: Bass, drums and lead. These borders are surmountable very quickly due to their ambivalent sound production. The interconnection of the three instruments in particular supports loop-based play that reminds of electronic dance music as well as sound experiments. Optionally the instruments can be controlled with low-cost hardware controllers. These are a KORG nanoKONTROL2, an Akai LPD8. The third instrument is controlled entirely with keyboard and mouse. But all instruments can be controlled in full without the controller using the mouse and keyboard on the screen. Most of the text elements are still in German language, but most of the common technical terms are English, anyway. The instruments are designed to be used without help from a teacher. Using their illustration patches they aim to explain themselves. In this form their content can still be upgraded by the presence of a teacher who supports and guides the learning progress. We created another version of the interface which is suitable for presentation to enable front-of-class teaching method. Teachers preferring this method can use the patches cleaned of all text to explain and show specific functionalities while the students use the fully featured versions.

ADD is meant to be a polyphonic bass synthesizer. But ADD can also produce melodic sounds and harmonic atmospheric sound textures. It provides a 16-Step-Sequencer. ADD essentially relies on additive synthesis but uses waveshaping and subtractive synthesis as well. ADD can be controlled by a KORG nanoKONTROL2 connected via USB but is also fully functional with mouse and keyboard. All three instruments can be connected via the network function. This enables them to share some of their parameters with each other. ADD controls the fundamental frequency and is effecting the two other instruments.

DRUMBO uses a 16-Step-Sequencer and is meant to be a typical Drum Machine. DRUMBOs sounds production completely relies on digital sound synthesis. Especially frequency modulation (FM) and amplitude modulation (AM) are particularly important. DRUMBO can be used for percussive sounds, but also for tonal and complex experimental sounds while using its sustain, the AM and FM synthesis, the waveshaping and many other effects. The sequencer allows to create four patterns in parallel which can be saved, loaded and modified. DRUMBO offers a large number of sound and pattern presets to begin with. DRUMBO can be controlled by a AKAI LPD8 connected via USB but is also fully functional with mouse and keyboard. All three instruments can be connected via the network function. This enables them to share some of their parameters with each other. DRUMBO controls the tempo (50-240 bpm).

JERRY is basically a pad- or a lead synthesizer. JERRYs sound production is more experimental and allows to create various sounds: 
Monophonic tones, complex sounds for tonal play but also noisy experimental sounds. The sounds are primarily effected by the moving speed and position of the mouse on the screen. Numerous presets help to quickly experience JERRYs potential. A simple 16-Step-Sequencer help JERRY to coexist with the other instruments and even create rythmic sounds. JERRY is completely controlled by mouse and keyboard. All three instruments can be connected via the network function. This enables them to share some of their parameters with each other. JERRY controls the tonality (continuous, chromatic, major or minor).

Before you get started, please install Pure Data extended. It is available at https://puredata.info/downloads/pd-extended/releases/0.43.4
The instruments can be launched with the patches ADD.pd, DRUMBO.pd or JERRY.pd within the specific folders.

For more information, please contact: christofmschultz@gmail.com or drahtsalat@joyscouts.de

Christof & Marten - loop2016

